---
title: Aether Integration
description: An Investigation into the possible unification of GR and QM
header: ''
duration: ''

---
Due to the plague-like influence of verificationism, the philosophy of time and space during the past century has been largely reduced to philosophical reflection on spatio-temporal concepts given by physics. With the collapse of positivism and the rejuvenation of metaphysics, the metaphysical foundations of relativity theory, deserve renewed scrutiny since they have been largely developed along the lines of the positivistic attitude of the Machian philosophies who by the way blatantly announces the sum total of his entire world view by writing in his book "Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung", and I quote, "Its intention is...an enlightening one, or to put it more bluntly, an anti-metaphysical one.” Such militant attitude towards metaphysics and extreme sensationalist world view presupposes a reductionist understanding of Newton’s metaphysical view of Time. We are well aware of the positivistic influence of Ernst Mach on Einstein. Such an epistemology is obviously biased. It is extremely instructive to observe that when Einstein blasts Mach and Ostwald for their "positivistic philosophical attitude" which led them to deny the reality of atoms, he equates positivism with the view ''that facts by themselves can and should yield scientific knowledge without free conceptual construction, - a view which Einstein had long rejected. Although In his "Autobiographical Notes," Einstein admits that his epistemological credo "actually evolved only much later and very slowly and does not correspond with the point of view I held in younger years." In those years, it was Mach who held sway: "I see Mach's greatness in his incorruptible skepticism and independence; in my younger years, however, Mach's epistemological position also influenced me very greatly, a position which today appears to me to be essentially untenable." Having said this, we investigate the nature of time, treating time as a metaphysical thing, which as I am sure you must be aware of, is the branch of philosophy which deals with questions of such sort. Naturally, this led us to discover the two theories of time, A and B or the tensed and the tenseless theory of time. The Lorentz - Fitzgerald, Poincare along with Einstein’s own interoperation of his relativistic equations was indeed presupposed on the A theory of time, it was only much later, with the epochal work of Herman Minkowski and the advent of space time, did Einstein adopted the B theory of time naively (it is safe to assume that he did not know about this as regards to what we have found, yet). However, we believe that the two theories of time are in reality unified at a much more fundamental level. The notion of temporal becoming is an extremely sophisticated issue, and this is where we suspect that the two theories unify into one another. The claim that a Lorentzian world is re-describable as a Minkowski world implies the possibility of backward causation! But whether one will tolerate retro-causation plausibly depends on whether one adopts an A- or a B-Theory of time. Irrespective of this, we have strong reasons to believe the existence of a preferred frame of reference because of the plethora of scientific literature which we have found on this topic, works of Ted Jacobson et al. which has more or less sparked a sudden interest in the Einstein - Aether theories, which is basically a general covariant theory of gravity coupled to dynamical preferred frame. The name Christopher Eling along with Sean Carroll et al also comes to mind here.

Now coming to the second part, the fluid-like ontology of the universe. We are quite convinced by the scientific literature which is present on this unification of hydrodynamics and general relativity and how all of it is well consistent with the current model of our universe in tandem with all the empirical evidence which has been established. One prominent name which comes to mind is, Shiraz Minwalla who along with his collaborators has conclusively unified fluid mechanics and gravity using the AdS/CFT correspondence of Maldacena. In my recent conversation with the famous Nobel laureate John C. Mather, he gave me the book by the Russian physicist, G.E. Volovik, who also happens to propose the same thing. James D. Bjorken has given the foreword to this book. One can easily find a plethora of papers on the super fluidic approach towards dark energy. Marco Fedi in his 2017 paper, “A superfluid theory of everything?” Is among many who have ventured in this approach towards cosmology. Volovik has investigated the condensed matter related issues as well in his book. The work of Veronika E Hubeny et. al. “The fluid/gravity correspondence: a new perspective on the membrane paradigm” is also quite relevant. Famous MIT Physicist, Dr. Kerson Huang's book "A superfluid universe" is also one among them. The significant invariant in all these papers (and many more) is the notion of the aether. We believe that the classical field theories are mathematical abstractions of this aether. We have tried to show this in our paper (see : attached file) by the standard quantization of the scalar field by the lattice like approximation method then building a sample/toy universe which contains an aggregate of dust particles (matter particles) which behaves as those of a fluid and then derive the Friedmann equations which is exactly the same set of results when calculated by GR! Such a sample universe is indeed, isotropic and homogeneous and hopefully does in fact entail the three mass generations. At the moment we are trying to understand how the standard model fits in this framework (in which we were hoping you could help us out!). In our model the space time has been given a physical significance in the form of an aether, and we claim that the tenets of the Michael-Morley experiment were incorrect, which is famously said to rule out the existence of such fluid-like substance. We believe that the detection of the gravitational waves was nothing else than the detection of the aether. We know that Lorentz continued to study, lecture, and converse with Einstein about both the Special and the General Theory of Relativity, and though he disagreed with Einstein's interpretation of the mathematical formalism of relativity theory, he always graciously expressed his appreciation of Einstein's view. Lorentz saw clearly that the central issue dividing Einstein's and Lorentz's divergent interpretations of the mathematical core of relativity theory was epistemological in nature; moreover, he was convinced that Einstein's verifIcationism was untenable and told him as much. Einstein continued to disparage the aether up until 1916, when in response to a letter from Lorentz, in which Lorentz argued that GR is compatible with an aether, Einstein proposed a new relativistic conception of the aether, which is described by the use of a metrical tensor. Einstein himself later called and treated space time as the aether. There is significant literature on this as well, for example the work of Maurice J. Dupr ́e and Frank J. Tipler in their 2018 paper : General Relativity As an Æther Theory has championed this interpretation as well.

In our ongoing project, aether integration and the coming papers in the same vein, we propose that the quantisation of the scalar field (which by the way is also thought of like a fluid in space time with a four vector velocity at every point in space time) is done by constituting the aether with quasicrystals which are arranged in a Penrose tiling like approximation, such a conception of the arrangement of the quasicrystalline substructure of reality, indeed has a continuum limit as ensured by Paul Steinheirdt in his talk at the Institute for Advanced Study. Such an ontology would yield a quantised nature in the quantum realm and when taken as the limit of the whole, becomes continuous which Mr. Klee has said multiple times, when thought of as an aggregate, approximates that of like a fluid whose mechanics is governed by the Navier Stokes, which is also the same case of our model. (Not exactly ours, it’s more of an ensemble). In one of the QGR videos (Quantum Clocks part 3) Mr. Klee Irwin mentioned "discretized aether", a fluid-like approximation of the quasicrystals and then determining its dynamics by the use of Navier Stokes which is by the way completely in line with what we are building towards.

By the way, “I personally view consciousness as nested internal gauge symmetries, braneworlds embedded inside braneworlds. In this manner, our universe condenses from the infinite-dimensional mind of the universe. If we embed spacetime into infinite dimensions, this is related to the IR and UV branes in a generalized Randall-Sundrum model, such that the extra dimensions are effectively below the Planck scale or above the scale of the visible universe.” - interesting remark.

To do full justice to the idea of consciousness, we must look at the exact science which deals with things of such sort, psychology. Douglas Hofstadter's works on this, as some sort of a strange loop is indeed quite fascinating. However, we would like you to suggest the works of the Swiss psychologist, Carl Gustav Jung. His work on the nature of consciousness is extremely deep. In fact what Klee talks about the universal consciousness has been worked out in quite visceral detail(s) by Jung. Jung calls this universal consciousness as the archetype of the collective consciousness. He places the self (the centre of the psyche) as the seat for this collective consciousness. Roger Penrose, in our opinion, rightly thinks that the nature of consciousness is fundamentally non computational. Jung masterfully embeds the notion of consciousness in mythology and archetypes and brilliantly relates it back to almost all the mythologies spanning across the multiple cultures across space and time. Jung thought that the psyche had a definite map, a mandala, he would say, an architecture of the psyche, and in the centre of that mandala, resides the self or the seat of the collective consciousness which Klee “downloads” his intuition from. If we agree to perceive consciousness to be atemporal, then the notion of past future and present coalesce. In that case the statements such as “trying to remember the future” does indeed become “valid” in some sense. Jung’s Aion and Peterson’s Maps of meaning are the two books that we would recommend for further inquiries into this.

P.S. A quasicrystal-like structure can be found in Jung's book : Aion, page number 236, called the Moses Quaternio which also has a repeating nature, sort of like the quantisation of the psyche. When summed up and then projected to the two dimensional surface becomes the schema of the Uroboros!

Shad Azmi,

(President, Olympia Academia (AMU)).